
"Is Artificial Intelligence a Myth?" Exploring whether human sense-making can be surpassed by AI.
--

AUTOMATION AND THE FUTURE OF WORK by Aaron Benanav

new left review 119 sept oct 2019 5

The world is abuzz with talk of automation. Rapid advances in artificial intelligence, machine learning and robotics seem set to transform the world of work. In the most advanced factories, companies like Tesla have been aiming for ‘lights-out’ production, in which fully automated work processes, no longer needing human hands, can run in the dark. Meanwhile, in the illuminated halls of robotics conventions, machines are on display that can play ping-pong, cook food, have sex and even hold conversations. Computers are not only developing new strategies for playing Go, but are said to be writing symphonies that bring audiences to tears. Dressed in white lab coats or donning virtual suits, computers are learning to identify cancers and will soon be developing legal strategies. Trucks are already barrelling across the us without drivers; robotic dogs are carrying military-grade weapons across desolate plains. Are we living in the last days of human toil? Is what Edward Bellamy once called the ‘edict of Eden’ about to be revoked, as ‘men’—or at least, the wealthiest among them—become like gods?

There are many reasons to doubt the hype. For one thing, machines remain comically incapable of opening doors or, alas, folding laundry. Robotic security guards are toppling into mall fountains. Computerized digital assistants can answer questions and translate documents, but not well enough to do the job without human intervention; the same is true of self-driving cars.2 In the midst of the American ‘Fight for Fifteen’ movement, billboards went up in San Francisco threatening to replace fast-food workers with touchscreens if a law raising the minimum wage were passed. The Wall Street Journal dubbed the bill the ‘robot employment act’. Yet many fast-food workers in Europe already work alongside touchscreens and often earn better pay than in the us.3 Is the talk of automation overdone?

i. the automation discourse

In the pages of newspapers and popular magazines, scare stories about automation may remain just idle chatter. However, over the past decade, this talk has crystalized into an influential social theory, which purports not only to analyse current technologies and predict their future, but also to explore the consequences of technological change for society at large. This automation discourse rests on four main propositions. First, workers are already being displaced by ever-more advanced machines, resulting in rising levels of ‘technological unemployment’. Second, this displacement is a sign that we are on the verge of achieving a largely automated society, in which nearly all work will be performed by self-moving machines and intelligent computers. Third: automation should entail humanity’s collective liberation from toil, but because we live in a society where most people must work in order to live, this dream may well turn out to be a nightmare.4 Fourth, therefore, the only way to prevent a mass-unemployment catastrophe is to provide a universal basic income (ubi), breaking the connection between the incomes people earn and the work they do, as a way to inaugurate a new society.
This argument has been put forward by a number of self-described futurists. In the widely read Second Machine Age (2014), Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee argue that we find ourselves ‘at an inflection point—a bend in the curve where many technologies that used to be found only in science fiction are becoming everyday reality.’ New technologies promise an enormous ‘bounty’, but Brynjolfsson and McAfee caution that ‘there is no economic law that says that all workers, or even a majority of workers, will benefit from these advances.’ On the contrary: as the demand for labour falls with the adoption of more advanced technologies, wages are stagnating; a rising share of annual income is therefore being captured by capital rather than by labour. The result is growing inequality, which could ‘slow our journey’ into what they call ‘the second machine age’ by generating a ‘failure mode of capitalism’ in which rentier extraction crowds out technological innovation.5 In Rise of the Robots (2015), Martin Ford similarly claims that we are pushing ‘towards a tipping point’ that is poised to ‘make the entire economy less labour-intensive.’ Again, ‘the most frightening long-term scenario of all might be if the global economic system eventually manages to adapt to the new reality’, leading to the creation of an ‘automated feudalism’ in which the ‘peasants would be largely superfluous’ and the elite impervious to economic demands.6 For these authors, education and retraining will not be enough to stabilize the demand for labour in an automated economy; some form of guaranteed non-wage income, such as a negative income tax, must be put in place.

The automation discourse has been enthusiastically adopted by the jeans-wearing elite of Silicon Valley. Bill Gates is advocating for a tax on robots. Mark Zuckerberg told Harvard undergraduate inductees that they should ‘explore ideas like universal basic income’, a policy Elon Musk also thinks will become increasingly ‘necessary’ over time, as robots outcompete humans across a growing range of jobs.8 Musk has been naming his SpaceX drone vessels after spaceships from Iain M. Banks’s Culture Series, a set of ambiguously utopian science-fiction novels depicting a post-scarcity world in which human beings live fulfilling lives alongside intelligent robots, called ‘minds’, without the need for markets or states.9

Politicians and their advisors have equally identified with the automation discourse, which has become one of the leading perspectives on our ‘digital future’. In his farewell presidential address, Obama suggested that the ‘next wave of economic dislocations’ will come not from overseas trade, but rather from ‘the relentless pace of automation that makes a lot of good, middle-class jobs obsolete.’ Robert Reich, former Labour Secretary under Bill Clinton, expressed similar fears: we will soon reach a point ‘where technology is displacing so many jobs, not just menial jobs but also professional jobs, that we’re going to have to take seriously the notion of a universal basic income.’ Clinton’s former Treasury Secretary, Lawrence Summers, made the same admission: once-‘stupid’ ideas about technological unemployment now seem increasingly smart, he said, as workers’ wages stagnate and economic inequality rises. The discourse has become the basis of a long-shot presidential campaign for 2020: Andrew Yang, Obama’s former ‘Ambassador of Global Entrepreneurship’, has penned his own tome on automation, The War on Normal People, and is now running a futuristic campaign on a ‘Humanity First’, ubi platform. Among Yang’s vocal supporters is Andy Stern, former head of the seiu, whose Raising the Floor is yet another example of the discourse.
Yang and Stern—like all of the other writers named so far—take pains to assure readers that some variant of capitalism is here to stay, even if it must jettison its labour markets; however, they admit to the influence of figures on the far left who offer a more radical version of the automation discourse. In Inventing the Future, Nick Srnicek and Alex Williams argue that the ‘most recent wave of automation is poised’ to transform the labour market ‘drastically, as it comes to encompass every aspect of the economy’.11 They claim that only a socialist government would actually be able to fulfil the promise of full automation by creating a post-work or post-scarcity society. In Four Futures, Peter Frase 
10 See, respectively, Claire Cain Miller, ‘A Darker Theme in Obama’s Farewell: Automation Can Divide Us’, nyt, 12 January 2017; Kessler, ‘Zuckerberg’s Opiate For the Masses’; Eduardo Porter, ‘Jobs Threatened by Machines: A Once “Stupid” Concern Gains Respect’, nyt, 7 June 2016; Kevin Roose, ‘His 2020 Campaign Message: The Robots Are Coming’, nyt, 12 February 2018; Andrew Yang, The War on Normal People: The Truth About America’s Disappearing Jobs and Why Universal Basic Income Is Our Future, New York 2018; Andy Stern, Raising the Floor: How a Universal Basic Income Can Renew Our Economy and Rebuild the American Dream, New York 2016.
11 Nick Srnicek and Alex Williams, Inventing the Future: Postcapitalism and a World Without Work, London and New York 2015, p. 112.benanav: Automation 9 
thoughtfully explores the alternative outcomes for such a post-scarcity society, depending on whether it still had private property and still suffered from resource scarcity, which could persist even if labour scarcity were overcome.12 Like the liberal proponents of the automation discourse, these left-wing writers stress that, even if the coming of advanced robotics is inevitable, ‘there is no necessary progression into a post-work world’.13 Srnicek, Williams and Frase are all proponents of ubi, but in a left-wing variant. For them, ubi serves as a bridge to ‘fully automated luxury communism’, a term originally coined in 2014 by Aaron Bastani to name a possible goal of socialist politics, and which flourished for five years as a meme on the internet before his book—outlining an automated future in which artificial intelligence, solar power, gene-editing, asteroid mining and lab-grown meat generate a world of limitless leisure and self-invention—finally appeared.14
Recurrent fears
These futurist visions, from all points of the political spectrum, depend upon a common prediction of the trajectory of technological change. Have they got this right? To answer this question, it is helpful to have a couple of working definitions. Automation may be distinguished as a specific form of labour-saving technical innovation: automation technologies fully substitute for human labour, rather than merely augmenting human-productive capacities. With labour-augmenting technologies, a given job category will continue to exist, but each worker in that category will be more productive. For example, adding new machines to an assembly-line producing cars may make line workers more productive without abolishing line work as such. However, fewer workers will be needed in total to produce any given number of automobiles. Whether that results in fewer jobs will then depend on how much output—the total number of cars—also increases. 
By contrast, automation may be defined as what Kurt Vonnegut describes in Player Piano: it takes place whenever an entire ‘job classification has been eliminated. Poof.’ No matter how much production might increase, another telephone-switchboard operator or hand-manipulator of rolled 
12 Peter Frase, Four Futures: Life After Capitalism, London and New York 2016; Manu Saadia, Trekonomics: The Economics of Star Trek, San Francisco 2016.
13 Srnicek and Williams, Inventing the Future, p. 127.
14 Aaron Bastani, Fully Automated Luxury Communism: A Manifesto, London and New York 2019.10 nlr 119 
steel will never be hired. In these cases, machines have fully substituted for human labour. Much of the debate around the future of workplace automation turns on an evaluation of the degree to which present or near-future technologies are labour-substituting or labour-augmenting in character. Distinguishing between these two types of technical change turns out to be incredibly difficult in practice. One famous study from the Oxford Martin School suggested that 47 per cent of jobs in the us are at high risk of automation; a more recent study from the oecd predicts that 14 per cent of oecd jobs are at high risk, with another 32 per cent at risk of significant change in the way they are carried out (due to labour-augmenting rather than substituting innovations).15 
It is unclear, however, whether even the highest of these estimates suggests that a qualitative break with the past has taken place. By one count, ‘57 per cent of the jobs workers did in the 1960s no longer exist today’.16 Automation, in fact, turns out to be a constant feature of the history of capitalism. By contrast, the discourse around automation, which extrapolates from instances of technological change to a broader social theory, is not constant; it periodically recurs in modern history. Excitement about a coming age of automation can be traced back to at least the mid-19th century. Charles Babbage published On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures in 1832; John Adolphus Etzler’s The Paradise Within the Reach of All Men, Without Labour appeared in 1833, Andrew Ure’s The Philosophy of Manufactures in 1835. These books presaged the imminent emergence of largely or fully automated factories, run with minimal or merely supervisory human labour. This vision was a major influence on Marx, whose Capital, Volume One argued that a complex world of interacting machines was in the process of displacing labour at the centre of economic life. 
Visions of automated factories then appeared again in the 1930s, 1950s and 1980s, before their re-emergence in the 2010s. Each time, they 
15 Carl Frey and Michael Osborne originally released their study as an Oxford Martin working paper online in 2013; it was later published as ‘The Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerization?’, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 114, January 2017; Ljubica Nedelkoska and Glenda Quintini, ‘Automation, Skills Use and Training’, oecd Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, no. 202, 2018.
16 Quoted in Jerry Kaplan, ‘Don’t Fear the Robots’, wsj, 21 July 2017. See also Robert Atkinson and John Wu, ‘False Alarmism: Technological Disruption and the us Labor Market, 1850–2015’, Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, 2017.benanav: Automation 11 
were accompanied or shortly followed by predictions of a coming age of ‘catastrophic unemployment and social breakdown’, which could be prevented only if society were reorganized.17 To point out the periodicity of this discourse is not to say that its accompanying social visions should be dismissed. For one thing, the technological breakthroughs presaged by automation discourse could still be achieved at any time: just because they were wrong in the past does not necessarily mean that they will always be wrong in the future. More than that, these visions of automation have clearly been generative in social terms: they point to certain utopian possibilities latent within modern capitalist societies. The error in their approach is merely to suppose that, via ongoing technological shifts, these utopian possibilities will imminently be revealed via a catastrophe of mass unemployment. 
The basic insight on which automation theory relies was described, most succinctly, by the Harvard economist Wassily Leontief. He pointed out that the ‘effective operation of the automatic price mechanism’ at the core of capitalist societies ‘depends critically’ on a peculiar feature of modern technology, namely that in spite of bringing about ‘an unprecedented rise in total output’, it nevertheless ‘strengthened the dominant role of human labour in most kinds of productive processes’.18 At any time, a breakthrough could destroy this fragile pin, annihilating the social preconditions of functioning market economies. Drawing on this insight—and adding only that such a technological breakthrough now exists—the automation prognosticators often argue that capitalism must be a transitory mode of production, which will eventually give way to a new form of life that does not organize itself around work for wages and monetary exchange.19 
Taking its periodicity into account, automation theory may be described as a spontaneous discourse of capitalist societies, which, for a mixture of structural and contingent reasons, reappears in those societies time 
17 Amy Sue Bix, Inventing Ourselves Out of Jobs: America’s Debate Over Technological Unemployment, 1929–1981, Baltimore 2000, pp. 305–7. See also Jason Smith, ‘Nowhere to Go: Automation, Then and Now’, Brooklyn Rail, March–April 2017.
18 Wassily Leontief, ‘Technological Advance, Economic Growth, and the Distribution of Income’, Population and Development Review, vol. 9, no. 3, 1983, p. 404.
19 .............................................................................capitalist economies automatically generates full employment. See his ‘Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren (1930)’, in Essays in Persuasion, New York 1932. See also William Beveridge, Full Employment in a Free Society, London 1944, especially pp. 21–3.12 nlr 119 
and again as a way of thinking through their limits. What summons the automation discourse periodically into being is a deep anxiety about the functioning of the labour market: there are simply too few jobs for too many people. Proponents of the automation discourse consistently explain the problem of a low demand for labour in terms of runaway technological change. 
Declining labour demand
If automation discourse appeals so widely again today, it is because, whatever their causes, the ascribed consequences of automation are all around us: global capitalism clearly is failing to provide jobs for many of the people who need them. There is, in other words, a persistently low demand for labour, reflected not only in higher spikes of unemployment and increasingly jobless recoveries—both frequently cited by automation theorists—but also in a phenomenon with more generic consequences: declining labour shares of income. Many studies have now confirmed that the labour share, whose steadiness was held to be a stylized fact of economic growth, has been falling for decades (Figure 1). 
These shifts signal a radical decline in workers’ bargaining power. Realities for the typical worker are worse than these statistics suggest, since wage growth has become increasingly skewed towards the highest earners: the infamous top one per cent. A growing gap has opened up not only between the growth of labour productivity and average wage-incomes, but also between the growth of average wages and that of median wages, with the result that many workers see a vanishingly thin slice of economic growth (Figure 2).20 Under these conditions, rising inequality is contained only by the strength of redistributive programmes. Even critics of automation discourse such as David Autor and Robert Gordon are disturbed by these trends: something has gone wrong with the economy, leading to a low demand for labour.21
20 See Josh Bivens and Lawrence Mishel, ‘Understanding the Historic Divergence Between Productivity and a Typical Worker’s Pay’, epi Briefing Paper 406, September 2015; Paolo Pasimeni, ‘The Relation Between Productivity and Compensation in Europe’, European Commission Discussion Paper 79, March 2018.
21 See David Autor, ed., ‘Paradox of Abundance: Automation Anxiety Returns’ in Subramanian Rangan, Performance and Progress: Essays on Capitalism, Business and Society, Oxford 2015, p. 257; Robert Gordon, Rise and Fall of American Growth, Princeton 2016, p. 604.
Figure 1: Labour Share of Income, G7 Economies, 1980–2015JapanFranceItalyG7USACanadaGermanyUK198019851990199520002005201020155358636873%
Source: oecd Compendium of Productivity Indicators, 2017, Chapter 1, Figure 1.8.
Figure 2: Productivity-Wages Gap, oecd Countries, 1995–2013Labour productivityReal average wageReal median wage1001995199719992001200320052007200920112013110130120140
Note: 1995=100. Source: oecd Economic Outlook, Volume 2018, Issue 2, Chapter 2, Figure 2.2. Employment weighted average of 24 countries, including Finland, Germany, Japan, Korea, United States, France, Italy, Sweden, Austria, Belgium, uk, Australia, Spain, Czechia, Denmark, Hungry, Poland, Netherlands, Norway, Canada, New Zealand, Ireland, Israel and Slovakia. For detailed information, see the oecd Economic Outlook.14 nlr 119 
Is automation the cause of the low demand for labour? I will join the critics of automation discourse in arguing that it is not. However, along the way, I will also criticize the critics—both for producing explanations of low labour demand that only apply in high-income countries and for failing to produce anything like a radical vision of social change that is adequate to the scale of the problems we now confront. Indeed, it should be said from the outset that I am more sympathetic to the left automation theorists than to their critics. 
Even if the explanation they offer turns out to be inadequate, the automation theorists have at least focused the world’s attention on the problem of a persistently low demand for labour. They have also excelled in actually trying to imagine solutions to this problem that are broadly emancipatory in character. In Jameson’s terms, the automation theorists are our late capitalist utopians.22 In a world reeling from the ‘perfect storm’ of climate change, rising inequality, recalcitrant neoliberalism and resurgent ethno-nationalism, the automation theorists are the ones pushing through the catastrophe with a vision of an emancipated future, in which humanity advances to the next stage in our history, whatever that might mean (or whatever we want to make it mean), and technology helps to free us all to discover and follow our passions. That is true in spite of the fact that—like many of the utopians of the past—the actual visions these latest utopians offer need to be freed from their largely technocratic fantasies of how social change to a better future might take place.
Major shifts in the forms of government intervention in the economy are adopted only under massive social pressure, such as, in the course of the 20th century, the threat of communism or of civilizational collapse. Today, policy reforms could emerge in response to pressure coming from a new mass movement, aiming to change the basic makeup of the social order. Instead of fearing that movement, we should see ourselves as part of it, helping articulate its goals and paths forward. If that movement is defeated, maybe the best we will get is basic income, but that should not be our goal. We should be reaching towards a post-scarcity world, which advanced technologies will certainly help us realize, even if full automation is not achievable—or even desirable.
22 See Fredric Jameson, Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions, London and New York 2005.benanav: Automation 15 
The return of automation discourse is a symptom of our era, as it was in times past: it arises when the global economy’s failure to create enough jobs causes people to question its fundamental viability. The breakdown of this market mechanism today is more extreme than at any time in the past. This is because a greater share of the world’s population than ever before depends on selling its labour or the simple products of its labour to survive, in the context of weakening global economic growth. Our present reality is better described by near-future science-fiction dystopias than by standard economic analysis; ours is a hot planet, with micro-drones flying over the heads of the street hawkers and rickshaw pullers, where the rich live in guarded, climate-controlled communities while the rest of us wile away our time in dead-end jobs, playing video games on smartphones. We need to slip out of this timeline and into another. 
Reaching towards a post-scarcity world—in which all individuals are guaranteed access to whatever they need to make a life, without exception—can become the basis on which humanity mounts a battle against climate change. It can also be the foundation on which we remake the world, creating the conditions in which, as James Boggs once put it, ‘for the first time in human history, great masses of people will be free to explore and reflect, to question and to create, to learn and to teach, unhampered by the fear of where the next meal is coming from’.23 Finding our way forward requires a break between work and income, as the automation theorists recognize, but also between profit and income, as many do not.
In responding to the automation discourse, then, I will argue that the decline in the demand for labour is due not to an unprecedented leap in technological innovation, but to ongoing technical change in an environment of deepening economic stagnation. In the second part of this contribution, to be published in nlr 120, I contend that this fall in labour demand manifests not as mass unemployment, but rather as mass under-employment, not necessarily a problem for the elites. On this basis, I mount a critique of technocratic solutions, like basic income. I offer a thought-experiment of how we might imagine a post-scarcity society that centres on humans, not machines, and project a path of how we might get there through social struggle, rather than administrative intervention. But first, in Part One, I provide a diagnosis of the 
23 James Boggs, ‘Manifesto for a Black Revolutionary Party’, in Stephen Ward, ed., Pages from a Black Radical’s Notebook: A James Boggs Reader, Detroit 2011, p. 219.16 nlr 119 
underlying causes of the decline in demand for labour. This involves a detour to consider the fortunes of the global manufacturing sector and the competitive dynamics at work in labour’s ‘deindustrialization’.
2. labour’s global deindustrialization 
Automation-discourse theorists recognize that, if technologically induced job-destruction is to have widespread social ramifications, it will have to eliminate employment in the vast and variegated service sector, which absorbs 74 per cent of workers in high-income countries and 52 per cent worldwide.24 They therefore focus on ‘new forms of service-sector automation’ in retail, transportation and food services, where ‘robotization’ is said to be ‘gathering steam’ with a growing army of machines that take orders, stock shelves, drive cars and flip burgers. Many more service-sector jobs, including some that require years of education and training, will supposedly be rendered obsolete in the coming years due to advances in artificial intelligence.25 Of course, these claims are mostly predictions about the effects that technologies will have on future patterns of employment. Such predictions can go wrong—as for example when Eatsa, an automated fast-food company which employed neither cashiers nor waiters, was forced to close most of its stores in 2017.26
In making their case, automation theorists often point to the manufacturing sector as the precedent for what they imagine is beginning to happen in services—for in manufacturing, the employment-apocalypse has already taken place.27 To evaluate the theorists’ claims, it therefore makes sense to begin by looking at what role automation has played in 
24 World Bank, World Development Indicators. Within the global economy, many of these service workers are employed informally, earning incomes by picking through trash, or selling food out of pushcarts, in the sort of jobs that could already have been eliminated with 20th century technologies: supermarkets, big-box retailers, refrigerated trucking, etc.
25 Nick Dyer-Witheford, Cyber-Proletariat: Global Labour in the Digital Vortex, London 2015, p. 184. Routine intellectual activities, even highly skilled ones, are apparently proving easier to automate than non-routine manual jobs, which require more dexterity than machines presently possess. Brynjolfsson and McAfee, Second Machine Age, pp. 28–9.
26 Tim Carman, ‘This Automated Restaurant Was Supposed to Be the Future of Dining. Until Humanity Struck Back’, Washington Post, 24 October 2017.
27 See for example, Brynjolfsson and McAfee, Second Machine Age, pp. 30–1; Ford, Rise of the Robots, pp. 1–12.benanav: Automation 17 
that sector’s fate. After all, manufacturing is the area most amenable to automation, since on the shop floor it is possible to ‘radically simplify the environment in which machines work, to enable autonomous operation’.28 Industrial robotics has been around for a long time: the first robot, the ‘unimate’, was installed in a General Motors plant in 1961. Still, until the 1960s, scholars studying this sector were able to dismiss Luddite fears of long-term technological unemployment out of hand. Manufacturing employment in fact grew most rapidly in those lines where technical innovation was happening at the fastest pace, because it was in those lines that prices fell the fastest, stoking the growth of demand for the products.29
Industrialization has long since given way to deindustrialization, and not just in any one line but across the manufacturing sectors of most countries.30 The share of workers employed in manufacturing fell first across the high-income world: manufacturing employed 22 per cent of all workers in the us in 1970; that share declined to just 8 per cent in 2017. Over the same period, manufacturing employment shares fell from 23 per cent to 9 per cent in France, and from 30 per cent to 8 per cent in the uk. Japan, Germany and Italy have experienced smaller but still substantial declines: in Japan from 25 per cent to 15 per cent, in Germany from 29 per cent to 17 per cent, and in Italy from 25 per cent to 15 per cent. In all cases, the declines were eventually associated with substantial falls in the total number of people employed in manufacturing. In the us, Germany, Italy and Japan, the overall number of manufacturing jobs fell by approximately a third from postwar peaks; in France, by 50 per cent and in the uk, by 67 per cent.31 
It is commonly assumed that deindustrialization must be the result of production facilities moving offshore. Yet in none of the countries 
28 Autor, ‘Why Are There Still So Many Jobs?’, p. 23. 
29 Eileen Appelbaum and Ronald Schettkat, ‘Employment and Productivity in Industrialized Economies’, International Labour Review, vol. 134, no. 4–5, 1995, pp. 607–9.
30 Unless otherwise noted, statistics in the rest of this section are drawn from Conference Board, ‘International Comparisons of Manufacturing Productivity and Unit Labour Cost’, last updated July 2018, and ‘Total Economy Database’, last updated November 2018.
31 Note that manufacturing is one part of the larger industrial sector, which typically includes mining, construction and utilities, and which has also seen declining employment shares, mostly but not exclusively due to job loss in manufacturing.18 nlr 119 
named above has manufacturing job loss been associated with declines in manufacturing output. Real value added in manufacturing more than doubled in the us, France, Germany, Japan and Italy between 1970 and 2017. Even the uk, whose manufacturing sector fared worst of all among this group, saw a 25 per cent increase in manufacturing real value added over this period. To be sure, low- and middle-income countries are producing more and more goods for import into high-income countries; however, deindustrialization in the latter cannot simply be the result of productive capacity moving to the former. In the scholarly literature, deindustrialization is therefore ‘most commonly defined as a decline in the share of manufacturing in total employment’, regardless of corresponding trends in levels of manufactured output.32 This definition moves in step with automation theorists’ core expectations: more goods are being produced but by fewer workers. 
It is on this basis that commentators typically cite rapidly rising labour productivity, rather than an influx of low-cost imports from abroad, as the primary cause of industrial-job loss in advanced economies.33 On closer inspection, however, this explanation turns out to be inadequate: no upward leap has taken place in manufacturing productivity levels.34 On the contrary, manufacturing productivity has been growing at a sluggish pace for decades, leading Robert Solow to quip, ‘We see the computer age everywhere, except in the productivity statistics.’35 Automation theorists discuss this ‘productivity paradox’ as a problem for their account—explaining it in terms of weak demand for products, or the persistent availability of low-wage workers—but they understate its true significance. This is partly due to the appearance of steady labour-productivity growth in us manufacturing, at an average rate of around 
32 Fionna Tregenna, ‘Characterizing Deindustrialization: An Analysis of Changes in Manufacturing Employment and Output Internationally’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 33, no. 3, 2009, p. 433.
33 In the scholarly literature, see for example Robert Rowthorn and Ramana Ramaswamy’s oft cited paper, ‘Deindustrialization: Causes and Implications’, imf Working Paper 97/42, 1997. In the press, see Eduardo Porter, ‘Is the Populist Revolt Over? Not if Robots Have Their Way’, nyt, 30 January 2018.
34 The intuition here is that if automation were taking place, the manufacturing sector would paradoxically see rapidly rising levels of labour productivity, even as more and more workers were actually being expelled from the production process: output per worker would soar, making it seem as if the people who still had jobs were working at an incredibly efficient pace.
35 Quoted in Brynjolfsson and McAfee, Second Machine Age, p. 100.benanav: Automation 19 
3 per cent per year since 1950. On that basis, Brynjolfsson and McAfee suggest, automation could show up in the compounding effects of exponential growth, rather than an uptick in the growth rate.36 
However, official us manufacturing growth-rate statistics are overinflated, for example in logging the production of computers with higher processing speeds as equivalent to the production of more computers.37 On that basis, government statistics claim that productivity levels in the computers and electronics sub-sector rose at an average rate of over 10 per cent per year between 1987 and 2011, even as productivity growth rates outside of that sub-sector fell to around 2 per cent per year over the same period.38 Since 2011, trends across the manufacturing sector have worsened: real output per hour in the sector as a whole was lower in 2017 than at its peak in 2010. Productivity growth rates in manufacturing collapsed precisely when they were supposed to be rising rapidly due to industrial automation.
Correcting manufacturing-productivity statistics in the us brings them more into line with trends visible in the statistics of other countries. In Germany and Japan, manufacturing-productivity growth rates have fallen dramatically since their postwar peaks. In Germany, for example, manufacturing productivity grew at an average annual rate of 6.3 per cent per year in the 1950s and 60s, falling to 2.4 per cent since 2000. This downward trend is to some extent an expected result of the end of an era of rapid, catch-up growth. However, it should still be surprising to the automation theorists, since Germany and Japan have raced ahead of the us in the field of industrial robotics. Indeed, the robots used in Tesla’s largely automated car factory in California were made by a German robotics company.39 German and Japanese firms deploy about 
36 Brynjolfsson and McAfee, Second Machine Age, pp. 43–5.
37 See Martin Neil Baily and Barry P. Bosworth, ‘us Manufacturing: Understanding Its Past and Its Potential Future’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 28, no. 1, 2014; Daron Acemoglu et al, ‘Return of the Solow Paradox? it, Productivity, and Employment in us Manufacturing’, American Economic Review, vol. 104, no. 5, 2014; and Susan Houseman, ‘Understanding the Decline of us Manufacturing Employment’, Upjohn Institute Working Paper 18–287, 2018.
38 Baily and Bosworth, ‘us Manufacturing’, p. 9. Computers and electronics count for 10–15 per cent of us manufacturing output.
39 Daniel Michaels, ‘Foreign Robots Invade American Factory Floors’, wsj, 26 March 2017.20 nlr 119 
60 per cent more industrial robots per 10,000 manufacturing workers, compared to the us.40 
Yet deindustrialization continues to take place in all these countries, despite lacklustre manufacturing-productivity growth rates: that is, it is taking place as the automation theorists expect, but not for the reasons they offer. To explore the causes of deindustrialization in more detail, I use the following accounting identity. For any given industry, the rate of growth of output (ΔO) minus the rate of growth of labour productivity (ΔP) equals the rate of growth of employment (ΔE). Thus, ΔO – ΔP = ΔE.41 So, for example, if the output of automobiles grows by 3 per cent per year, and productivity in the automobile industry grows by 2 per cent per year, then employment in that industry must necessarily rise by one per cent per year (3 – 2 = 1). Contrariwise, if output grows by 3 per cent per year and productivity grows by 4 per cent per year, employment will contract by 1 per cent per year (3 – 4 = -1).
Disaggregating manufacturing-output growth rates in France provides us with a sense of the typical pattern playing out across the high-income countries (Figure 3).42 During the so-called Golden Age of postwar capitalism, productivity growth rates in French manufacturing were much higher than they are today—5.2 per cent per year, on average, between 1950 and 1973—but output growth rates were even higher than that—5.9 per cent per year—as a result of a steady increase in employment of 0.7 per cent per year. Since 1973, both output and productivity rates have declined, but output rates fell much more sharply than productivity rates. By the early years of the 21st century, productivity growth rates—although much slower, at 2.7 per cent per year—were now faster than their corresponding output growth rates—at 0.9 per cent—as manufacturing employment contracted rapidly, by 1.7 per cent per year. 
40 The countries with the highest levels of installed industrial robots per 10,000 manufacturing employees in 2016 included South Korea (631), Singapore (488), Germany (309) and Japan (303), as compared to the United States (189) and China (68), according to the International Federation of Robotics, ‘Robot Density Rises Globally’, ifr Press Releases, 7 Feb 2018.
41 This equation excludes the so-called small term, ΔPΔE, as insignificant. Note that because this equation is true according to the very definition of labour productivity (O/E), it cannot be used to establish relations of causality among the three terms, E, O and P.
42 It is worth noting, however, that job loss has been somewhat more severe in France compared to other European countries.benanav: Automation 21 
This disaggregation helps explain why automation theorists falsely perceive productivity to be growing at a rapid pace in manufacturing: in fact, productivity growth has been rapid only relative to extremely sluggish output growth. The same pattern can be seen in the statistics of other countries: no absolute decline in levels of manufacturing production has taken place, but there has been a decline in the output growth rate, with the result that output is growing more slowly than productivity (Table 1, overleaf). The simultaneity of limited technological dynamism and worsening economic stagnation combines to generate a progressive decline in industrial employment levels.
As such, ‘output-led’ deindustrialization is impossible to explain in purely technological terms.43 In searching for alternative perspectives, 
43 José Gabriel Palma, ‘Four Sources of “Deindustrialization” and a New Concept of the “Dutch Disease”’, in José Antonio Ocampo, ed., Beyond Reforms: Structural Dynamics and Macroeconomic Vulnerability, New York 2005, pp. 79–81. See Rowthorn and Ramaswamy, ‘Deindustrialization: Causes and Implications’, p. 6, as well as Dani Rodrik, ‘Premature Deindustrialization’, Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 21, no. 1, 2016, p. 7.
Figure 3: French Manufacturing Sector, 1950–2017
%1950–731974–20002001–17-3-1.501.5346Average Annual Growth RateReal outputProductivityEmployment
Source: Conference Board, International Comparisons of Productivity and Unit Labour Costs, July 2018 edition.22 nlr 119 
economists have mostly preferred to describe it as a harmless evolutionary feature of advanced economies. However, that perspective is itself at a loss in explaining extreme variations in the gdp per capita levels at which this supposedly evolutionary economic shift has taken place. Deindustrialization unfolded first in high-income countries in the late 1960s and early 1970s, at the tail-end of a period in which levels of income per person had converged across the us, Europe and Japan. In the decades that followed, deindustrialization then spread ‘prematurely’ to middle- and low-income countries, with larger variations in incomes per capita (Figure 4).44 In the late 1970s, deindustrialization arrived in southern Europe; much of Latin America, parts of East and Southeast 
44 For example, deindustrialization—as measured by the fall in the manufacturing share of employment—started in Brazil in 1986, when the country’s gdp per capita was $12,100 (measured in 2017 us dollars at purchasing power parity), that is, a little more than half of the gdp per capita level of France at the time it began to deindustrialize, in 1973. South Africa, Indonesia and Egypt had even lower income levels at the time when their economies began to deindustrialize. See also Sukti Dasgupta and Ajit Singh, ‘Manufacturing, Services and Premature Deindustrialization in Developing Countries: A Kaldorian Analysis’, in George Mavrotas and Anthony Shorrocks, eds, Advancing Development: Studies in Development Economics and Policy, London 2007; and Tregenna, ‘Characterizing Deindustrialization’.
Table 1: Manufacturing Growth Rates, 1950–2017
Output 
        Productivity 
        Employment 
        


        1950–73 
        4.4%
        3.1%
        1.2%
        1974–2000 
        3.1%
        3.3%
        -0.2%
        2001–17 
        1.2%
        3.2%
        -1.8%
        1950–73 
        7.6%
        5.7%
        1.8%
        1974–2000 
        1.3%
        2.5%
        -1.1%
        2001–17 
        2.0%
        2.2%
        -0.2%
        1950–73 
        14.9%
        10.1%
        4.3%
        1974–2000 
        2.8%
        3.4%
        -0.6%
        2001–17 
        1.7%
        2.7%
        -1.1%